# The practical guide to IT freelancing, part 1 #

I have been freelancing in IT on and off for the last past 8 years. Mostly,
between failed attempt at building a startup. In the recent years, I met more
and more people that are interested in jumping into the freelance world. Most of
them are regular employees in some tech company. I am not entirely sure of what
truly motivates all these people but my analytical brain can't stop finding a
pattern. Could it be the need to feel free and in control? Is it the money?

A few weeks ago, I spent a bit of time thinking about how I could help anyone
who is in doubt whether or not they should go freelance. This practical guide is
here for this exact purpose. It is by no means a complete guide and should be
approached with an open mindset as each individual situation can vary a lot from
another one. I will try to compile in this series of posts all the information I
wish I was told when I started myself.

We will talk about how to succeed as a freelancer, how to handle difficult
clients, how to not fall in the many traps that will be on your journey to
success.

If you are not interested in being a freelance, this guide should also
give some valuable strategy if you are in a regular employment position and want
to simply reduce your frustration if you are facing some management issues.

## The path that I chose ##

This practical guide is tainted by my personal experience. This personal
experience comes itself from the path that I chose a long time ago. By the past,
I have been an employee in rather bit corporation in France and in
Denmark. While I appreciated the financial reward of my activities, I was not
entirely fulfilled when it came to make my own decisions and getting rewarded
according to – what I was perceiving at the time – my own value.

Now, don't get me wrong, there are plenty of people that are happy in a regular
employment. I am actually slightly jealous of them for being able to coop with
corporation issues, startup issues, boss to employee issues. They also get a
great reward which is that they get to work with – possibly – great
colleagues. And in our times, social reward has a high value.


My original goal has always be a composition of multiple factors:

* taking pride in what I solutions that I can craft and being rewarded for it
* never being forced to do something that makes no sense, despite the money
* cutting down to delivering value rather that floating in political discussion
* being financially independent - at least for a few months

## Freelancing, what's in it for you? ##

### Free as in freelance ###

The freelancer stereotype has it all: money, being ruthless and dressing nicely.
TO-DO: find links.

I decided to focus on other less known aspect of the freelance life. How can I
leverage freelancing in order to "be free"? Free to work on what I want, free to
work from where we want. And this freedom of geo-location naturally bring some
considerations about the other freedom too:

* the freedom to work *when* I want
* the freedom to *not work* when we don't want to
    
Being a freelancer can help you to reach all of that, in very little time and
with a few actionable. Some freelancers decide to sacrifice all of the above in
order to earn a lot of money and retire early. I personally chose to use the
money to buy some freedom that my friends cannot afford. You can measure your
wealth by counting how many days you can afford not to work.

    [It turns out that having the discipline to live frugally, to invest rather than spend, to mend and make do, and to be able to live for longer and longer periods of time without having to work, are true measures of wealth.
](http://www.cnbc.com/2017/03/28/i-was-a-multi-millionaire-by-27-heres-what-i-learned.html)
    
### Having the right to say no ###

The best freedom that I have ever experienced is the right to say no. "No I don't
want to work for you", "No we should not deploy that crazy feature without
testing it properly first", "No I wont sacrifice everything in order to fit your
agenda" or simply "No, I don't know how to do".

In all situation, being a freelancer should help you to express your concerns
and issues on difficult situations. Not only this gives you a great sense of
freedom but this also helps you to build more sustainable business where trust is
at the heart of your values.

Saying "No" enforces the fact that you have pondered all the parameters and you
are strong enough to decline the offer, warn of the danger or even admit that
you are not a good fit for the job.

This is a true enabler for building a sustainable business where customers are
coming back to you. Because when you say "yes", they know that this is no bullshit.

This also forces you to communicate in a proper way, state that you are the
expert on the subject. If you have raised the warnings early enough and your
customer decides to ignore it nonetheless then it is *his* problem. Not yours
(hello freedom). Of course, you should be here to help fix the newly born pile
of mess but the roles are very clear: you are here to help for THEIR problem,
not here to create more.

Being hired for your expertise is a true enabler here as your peers will listen
and value your advice and warning early on.

### Get the opportunity to work on some super cool projects ###

I have heard by some fellow freelancers that all they were doing was to work on
the most boring projects – usually for banks – but the paycheck was so great
that they kept at it for too long. I have worked a few time for a bank as a
freelancer and I can tell you two things: I didn't get the most interesting
project (duh!) and it was not the best money either. So why doing it anyway? OK,
it paid the bills and allowed me to bootstrap my business. No shame in doing
it. But in the long run, this is not what I am chasing.

Being hired as an expert gives you a real upper hand on regular employees when
it comes to working on difficult projects where staffing can be difficult. Of
course, it requires that you spend time to educate yourself in order to be that
expert that people are willing to pay for. For this: [See my article on how to
improve your skills (TBD).](http://).

Finding the most suited project can be a daunting tasks at first but it will
turn out to be your best strategy in the long run. Working on interesting
project is what will help you to over achieve. Cherry on the cake, you will
learn fast – because you are interested in what you are doing – and hence can
resell the same skill over and over again.

Cherry on the cake? You get a financial reward in the meantime.

## What freelance isn't ##

Freelance is a great way to work on what you like while being valued by your
customer. But it is not an easy road. It is not an easy way to cash in money,
nor an easy way to work very little only relying only on acquired skills. As we
will see, freelancing is about sustaining a constant learning in order to be
able to choose your customers. 

![old book in tech are useless][http://imgur.com/a/Id1pb]

### Building your portfolio of clients is hard ###

I cannot stress this more, building your portfolio of client is what will keep
the ball rolling. But how to get started is a real daunting task. If you are a
technical person, chances are that you are not at ease at selling yourself. And
no one can blame you for it. We all have strength and weaknesses. But with few
little steps, you can really boost the way people perceives you. Building a
reputation is always easier if other people are speaking well about you. So you
need to make sure that your over deliver what you have agreed on.

You will need to cherish any customer and show them that you are here to solve
their issues. Even better, if you can handle their problem as soon as they appear
you are solving a huge headache down the road.

If done properly, one client at a time, you will have built a reputation of
being reliable, available and always her to help. And those customers will be
the one feeding you with more direct or indirect work.

You will have to be relentless in working on your reputation and get the word
out that you are 1) an expert on a certain subject and 2) are always happy to
help.

And this, is built with time.


### It's not easy to negotiate your price ###

you have people contacting you but how do you get the most value out of
it. Where do you put the value? Where do they put the value? You have to find a
common ground where all parties feels satisfied. Negotiating your price should
always be a win-win. That why, your customer will not try to get rid of you as
soon has he can and on the other hand, you wont be tempted to drop them as soon
as you get a better opportunity.

Remember that your client has a problem that needs to be solved, so you
shouldn't be shy with your price. But remember to always find a good ground for
negotiation. I have already explained
[how to improve your negotiation skills](http://sebastien.requiem.fr/2015/01/02/how-to-improve-your-negociation-skills.html).

The point is not to make profit as quick as possible. The point is to build on
your portfolio and place yourself as a trusted expert.

TO-DO: Insert link to Tips on how to negotiate your contract.


### You have to deal with a load of uncertainty ###

Generally, people don't like uncertainties. And if you are a true advert to
uncertainties, freelance is not for you. But there are ways to work on most of
the uncertainties. Most of the fears that prevent people to flip the switch and
dig into freelancing are usually very basic: How am I gonna make money? How am I
gonna get clients? How can I sustain my business over many years? How can I stay
on top of the game? How do you handle competition?

All these questions are legit. Who wants to start a business and see himself not
being able to pay for the bills?

Uncertainties are part of the business of being a freelancer. And this guide is
here to debunked most of them. The joy of feeling free and working on highly
rewarding projects should outburst any uncertainty that comes in the way.

It takes a great load of patience and hard work to overcome those uncertainties
so make sure that you are in for a ride.




## All in all ##

I hope that this brief introduction about what to expect when you are a
freelancer is getting you one step closer to flip the switch. You can now dig in
all various follow up articles. They will provide some valuable insight about
specific problems. that I faced over the years.

Now, go share that article to someone you know that is considering being a
freelance. Having the freelancer mindset is to help others :).
